Debugging tips (#33)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/dev/debugging.rst

* ``Unable to link... All available compiler options exhausted ...``: Even though Catalyst has a list of compilers that may be available in your system, it is possible that no compiler successfully linked the program to the libraries shipped with Catalyst.
  This should be a rare case, but if you ever find yourself seeing this error, you should check that one of the following compilers or interfaces are available in your ``PATH``: ``clang``, ``gcc``, ``c99``, ``c89``, ``cc``.
  Correctly installing any of these should be sufficient.
  Alternatively, you can also specify a preferred compiler to use during linking using the environment variable ``CATALYST_CC``.
  For example ``CATALYST_CC=clang-14`` specifies that ``clang-14`` will be the preferred compiler to be used during the linking stage.
* ``User defined compiler is not in path``: Following the example above, you may have installed ``clang-14`` in a different directory that is not currently on the ``PATH``.
  Please make sure that the executable specified in ``CATALYST_CC`` is available in the ``PATH`` and is flag compatible with ``gcc`` or ``clang``.

Running without Python runtime
==============================

> Sometimes, it might be useful to run the JIT compiled function without ``python``, for example in case of debugging.

Author: I imagine here ``python`` being the bash command used to run Python (the programming language)

> Sometimes, it might be useful to run the JIT compiled function without ``python``, for example in case of debugging.

Reviewer: Hmm I see. Since there are different ways to run Python (e.g. notebooks), I would suggest just using "Python", but I'll leave it to up you (feel free to resolve) :)

If the program succeeds without ``python``, then it is likely that the error is found in the interface between ``python`` and the JIT compiled function, or within Catalyst's ``python``'s internals.
As a quick sanity check you might want to run the JIT compiled function without Python.
Below is an example of how to obtain a C program that can be linked against the generated function:

.. code-block:: python

>     @qjit(keep_intermediate=True)

Reviewer: Is `keep_intermediate` required here?

Author: ```suggestion
    @qjit()
```

    def identity(x):
        return x

    print(identity.get_cmain(1.0))

Using the ``QJIT.get_cmain`` function, the following string is returned to the user:

.. code-block:: C

    #include <complex.h>
    #include <stddef.h>
    #include <stdint.h>

    typedef int64_t int64;
    typedef double float64;
    typedef float float32;
    typedef double complex complex128;
    typedef float complex complex64;

    struct memref_float64x0_t
    {
        float64* allocated;
        float64* aligned;
        size_t offset;

    };
    struct result_t {
        struct memref_float64x0_t f_0;
    };

    extern void setup(int, char**);
    extern void _catalyst_ciface_jit_identity(struct result_t*, struct memref_float64x0_t*);
    extern void teardown();

    int
    main(int argc, char** argv)
    {

        struct result_t result_val;
        float64 buff_0 = 1.0;
        struct memref_float64x0_t arg_0 = { &buff_0, &buff_0, 0 };

        setup(1, &argv[0]);
        _catalyst_ciface_jit_identity(&result_val, &arg_0);
        teardown();
    }

> The user can now compile and link this program and run without ``python``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user can now compile and link this program and run it without ``python``.
```

Pass Pipelines
==============

A lot of the compilation steps are broken into pass pipelines.
``PassPipeline`` is a class that specifies which binary and which flags are used for compilation.

> ``PassPipeline`` can be implemented by a user if the user wants to insert new passes in between defaul ``PassPipeline``'s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can implement their own ``PassPipeline`` by inheriting from this class and implementing the relevant methods/attributes.
Catalyst's compilation strategy can then adjusted by inserting new passes in then default pipeline or forming a completely new pipeline.
```

> ``PassPipeline`` can be implemented by a user if the user wants to insert new passes in between defaul ``PassPipeline``'s.

Reviewer: I think showing an example here of how to the above would be nice.

Author: Added an example here: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/33/commits/8ef9e2ba72fdeccda3c64b3f8943d9b9e5959899

We won't get into too much detail here, but sometimes it is useful to look at the output of a specific ``PassPipeline``.
To do so, simply use the ``get_output_of`` method available in ``QJIT``.
For example, if one wishes to inspect the output of the ``BufferizationPass``, simply run the following command.

.. code-block:: python

>     circuit.get_output_of("BufferizationPass")

Reviewer: I think this section should be separated by at least a paragraph from the above since it concerns printing pass results vs adding new passes.

Author: Separated this into two paragraphs: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/33/commits/ecf193b93193792443087b734f0cf748bb5dfa89

Compilation Steps
=================

The compilation process of a QJITed quantum function moves through various stages of the compilation pipeline including:

> - **Quantum Tape**: The quantum record of variational quantum programs in a single ``qml.QNode``

Reviewer: They don't necessarily have to be variational programs 
```suggestion
- **Quantum Tape**: the quantum record of hybrid quantum programs in a single ``qml.QNode``
```

> - **JAXPR**: The graph data structure maintained by `JAX <https://github.com/google/jax>`_ of the classical part for transformations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **JAXPR**: the graph data structure maintained by `JAX <https://github.com/google/jax>`_ for the classical & quantum parts of the compiled program
```

> - **MLIR**: A novel compiler framework and intermediate representation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **MLIR**: a novel compiler framework and intermediate representation
```

> - **HLO (XLA) + Quantum Dialect**: Lowering to `HLO <https://github.com/tensorflow/mlir-hlo>`_ is the first stage inside MLIR after leaving JAXPR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **HLO (XLA) + Quantum Dialect**: Lowering to `HLO <https://github.com/tensorflow/mlir-hlo>`_ is the first stage inside MLIR after leaving JAXPR.
```

> - **Builtin + Quantum Dialects**: HLO has been converted to a variety of classical dialects in MLIR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Builtin + Quantum Dialects**: HLO is then converted to a variety of classical dialects in MLIR.
```

> - **Bufferized MLIR**: All tensors have been `converted <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Bufferization>`_ to memory buffer allocations at this step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Bufferized MLIR**: All tensors are `converted <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Bufferization>`_ to memory buffer allocations at this step.
```

> - **LLVM Dialect**: Lower the code to `LLVM Dialect <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/LLVM/>`_ to target LLVMIR by providing a one-to-one mapping in MLIR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **LLVM Dialect**: Lowering the code to the `LLVM Dialect <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/LLVM/>`_ in MLIR simplifies the translation to LLVMIR by providing a one-to-one mapping.
```

> - **QIR**: A `specification <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/quantum/concepts-qir>`_ for quantum programs in LLVMIR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **QIR (LLVMIR)**: a `specification <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/quantum/concepts-qir>`_ for quantum programs in LLVMIR
```

> To ensure that you have access to all the stages, the ``keep_intermediate=True`` flag must be specified in ``qjit``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that you have access to all the stages, the ``keep_intermediate=True`` flag must be specified in the ``qjit`` decorator.
```

Reviewer: I thought this was no longer a requirement, since the temp files are kept alive as long as the QJIT is alive?

Author: Both statements can considered correct, the question is "when does the user have access to all the stages?". The temp files are alive as long as the QJIT object has not being garbage collected in Python. However, if you want to see the files after the QJIT object has been garbage collected (and even the Python process has ended), then it is necessary to add `keep_intermediate=True`. I will add this nuance to the debugging tips.

    typedef double float64;
    typedef float float32;
    typedef double complex complex128;
    typedef float complex complex64;

    struct memref_float64x0_t
    {
        float64* allocated;
        float64* aligned;
        size_t offset;

    };
    struct result_t {
        struct memref_float64x0_t f_0;
    };

    extern void setup(int, char**);
    extern void _catalyst_ciface_jit_identity(struct result_t*, struct memref_float64x0_t*);
    extern void teardown();

    int
    main(int argc, char** argv)
    {

        struct result_t result_val;
        float64 buff_0 = 1.0;
        struct memref_float64x0_t arg_0 = { &buff_0, &buff_0, 0 };

        setup(1, &argv[0]);
        _catalyst_ciface_jit_identity(&result_val, &arg_0);
        teardown();
    }

The user can now compile and link this program and run it without ``python``.

Pass Pipelines
==============

A lot of the compilation steps are broken into pass pipelines.
``PassPipeline`` is a class that specifies which binary and which flags are used for compilation.
Users can implement their own ``PassPipeline`` by inheriting from this class and implementing the relevant methods/attributes.

> Catalyst's compilation strategy can then adjusted by inserting new passes in then default pipeline or forming a completely new pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Catalyst's compilation strategy can then be adjusted by inserting new passes in then default pipeline or forming a completely new pipeline.
```

.. code-block:: python

    @qjit
    def identity(x):
        return x

    print(identity.get_cmain(1.0))

Using the ``QJIT.get_cmain`` function, the following string is returned to the user:

.. code-block:: C

    #include <complex.h>
    #include <stddef.h>
    #include <stdint.h>

    typedef int64_t int64;
    typedef double float64;
    typedef float float32;
    typedef double complex complex128;
    typedef float complex complex64;

    struct memref_float64x0_t
    {
        float64* allocated;
        float64* aligned;
        size_t offset;

    };
    struct result_t {
        struct memref_float64x0_t f_0;
    };

    extern void setup(int, char**);
    extern void _catalyst_ciface_jit_identity(struct result_t*, struct memref_float64x0_t*);
    extern void teardown();

    int
    main(int argc, char** argv)
    {

        struct result_t result_val;
        float64 buff_0 = 1.0;
        struct memref_float64x0_t arg_0 = { &buff_0, &buff_0, 0 };

        setup(1, &argv[0]);
        _catalyst_ciface_jit_identity(&result_val, &arg_0);
        teardown();
    }

The user can now compile and link this program and run it without Python.

> 

Reviewer 2: That would be nice to mention verbosity modes in Cataylst as well.

Author: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/33/commits/228d6f8cb20cd57c53bc820b21f8df0c86e0db78

        [RUNNING] clang -shared -rdynamic -Wl,-no-as-needed -Wl,-rpath,runtime/build/lib/capi:runtime/build/lib/backend:mlir/llvm-project/build/lib -Lmlir/llvm-project/build/lib -Lruntime/build/lib/capi -Lruntime/build/lib/backend -lrt_backend -lrt_capi -lpthread -lmlir_c_runner_utils /tmp/tmpwsoh3acq/circuit.nohlo.opt.buff.llvm.o -o /tmp/tmpwsoh3acq/circuit.nohlo.opt.buff.llvm.so

Pass Pipelines
==============

The compilation steps which take MLIR as an input and lower it to binary are broken into pass pipelines.
A ``PassPipeline`` is a class that specifies which binary and which flags are used for compilation.
Users can implement their own ``PassPipeline`` by inheriting from this class and implementing the relevant methods/attributes.
Catalyst's compilation strategy can then be adjusted by overriding the default pass pipeline.
For example, let's imagine that a user is interested in testing different optimization levels when compiling LLVM IR to binary using ``llc``.
The user would then create a ``PassPipeline`` that replaces the ``LLVMIRToObjectFile`` class.
First let's take a look at the ``LLVMIRToObjectFile``.

> .. code-block:: python
>     class LLVMDialectToLLVMIR(PassPipeline):
>         """LLVMIR To Object File."""
>     

Reviewer 2: It doesn't show the code-block in the compiled docs.
Update this as follow to fix the issue:
```suggestion
.. code-block:: python

    class LLVMIRToObjectFile(PassPipeline):
        """LLVMIR To Object File."""
    
```

        _executable = get_executable_path("llvm", "llc")
        _default_flags = [
            "--filetype=obj",
            "--relocation-model=pic",
        ]
    
        @staticmethod
        def get_output_filename(infile):
            path = pathlib.Path(infile)
            if not path.exists():
                raise FileNotFoundError("Cannot find {infile}.")

>             return str(path.with_suffix(".ll"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            return str(path.with_suffix(".o"))
```

The ``LLVMDialectTOLLVMIR`` and all classes derived from ``PassPipeline`` must define an ``_executable`` and ``_default_flags`` fields.
The ``_executable`` field is string that corresponds to the command that will be used to execute in a subprocess.
The ``_default_flags`` are the flags that will be used when running the executable.
The method ``get_output_filename`` computes the name of the output file given an input file.
It is expected that the output of a ``PassPipeline`` will be fed as an input to the following ``PassPipeline``.

From here, we can see that in order for the user to test different optimization levels, all that is needed is create a class that extends either ``PassPipeline`` or ``LLVMDialectToLLVMIR`` and appends the ``-O3`` flag to the ``_default_flags`` field. For example, either of the following classes would work:

> .. code-block:: python
>     class MyLLCOpt(PassPipeline):
>         """LLVMIR To Object File."""

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python

    class MyLLCOpt(PassPipeline):
        """LLVMIR To Object File."""
```

    
        _executable = get_executable_path("llvm", "llc")
        _default_flags = [
            "--filetype=obj",
            "--relocation-model=pic",
            "-O3",
        ]
    
        @staticmethod
        def get_output_filename(infile):
            path = pathlib.Path(infile)
            if not path.exists():
                raise FileNotFoundError("Cannot find {infile}.")

>             return str(path.with_suffix(".ll"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            return str(path.with_suffix(".o"))
```

or

> .. code-block:: python
>     class MyLLCOpt(LLVMIRToObjectFile):
>         """LLVMIR To Object File."""

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python

    class MyLLCOpt(LLVMIRToObjectFile):
        """LLVMIR To Object File."""
```
